[blog] Blog post for MUI X mid v6. Date Pickers, Data Grid, and Charts (#38241)
mui/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features.md

## Table of contents

- [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
- [Date Pickers](#date-pickers)
  - [Support for time zones](#support-for-time-zones)
  - [Digital clock](#digital-clock)
- [Data Grid](#data-grid)
  - [Copy and Paste](#copy-and-paste)
  - [Filter on column headers](#filter-on-column-headers)
  - [Performance Enhancements: Smoother Scrolling and Expanding Rows](#performance-enhancements-smoother-scrolling-and-expanding-rows)
- [Charts - alpha version 🎁](#charts---alpha-version-)
- [What's next](#whats-next)
- [Feedback](#feedback)

## Date Pickers

### Support for time zones

No more hassle displaying dates on the time zones of your choice. 🌎

You can effortlessly display and select dates and times in different time zones, without worrying about the conversion logic and keeping the stored value consistent with your backend.

<video preload="metadata" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" autoplay muted loop controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/timezone.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

> Use adapters to control the original value and set the `timezone` prop to define in which timezone the Date, Time, or DateTime should be displayed.

Reviewer: Fully agree, maybe it's worth saying that we are just using the date library time zone capability, but the adapters layer is clearly not the one to highlight here, it's an implementation detail.

> Use adapters to control the original value and set the `timezone` prop to define in which timezone the Date, Time, or DateTime should be displayed.

Author: I removed the adapter as a whole and focused on the timezone prop. I feel like thats better to understand. If readers have more question, it will prompt them to check out the doc.

</video>

This feature is integrated with the editing API, so pasted data can be persisted using the `processRowUpdate` prop to update your data source through your usual editing validation process.
Furthermore, the callbacks `clipboardPasteStart` and `clipboardPasteEnd` are fired during the clipboard paste operation, which can be useful for extra customizations around the event.

For more details on how to use clipboard copy and paste, check out the [feature's page](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/clipboard/).

### Filter on column headers[<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan)

This feature allows users to quickly filter the data without needing any additional menu and can be activated using the `unstable_headerFilters` prop.

The new filter fields are displayed below the headers and are synchronized with the filter panel, but for those seeking more simplicity, disable the default filter panel using `disableColumnFilter` prop and set filters to use only the default operator.
You can also customize the header filter cell for a specific column using the `renderHeaderFilter` method of `GridColDef`

> For more details on how to use and customize the filters, check out its [documentation page](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/filtering/header-filters/).

Reviewer 2: This seems like a pretty major and awaited change, maybe it would make sense to showcase it visually as well? 🤔

Author: Added a video!

We always strive to ensure that MUI X remains performant and efficient, particularly when dealing with large and complex data.

## Charts - alpha version 🎁

We are delighted to announce the upcoming expansion of MUI X– a brand-new suite of components specifically designed for building and easily customizing appealing charts.

With MUI X Charts, you can choose from a wide range of chart types, including line charts, bar charts, pie charts, area charts, scatter plots, and more. Each chart type is thoughtfully crafted with attention to detail, ensuring that the visual representations are not only aesthetically pleasing but also highly effective in conveying complex data.

And it ships with a couple of rad palettes, specially crafted by our designers!

Checkout a video highlighting some of our Charts!

<video preload="metadata" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/charts_final_v1.mov" type="video/mp4">
</video>

As we progress toward the stable version, we're committed to enhancing the overall experience for developers and users, so your feedback is fundamental!

> We will also steadily expand our portfolio with new chart types; the Pie Chart is next on our list for the first stable version.

Reviewer 2: Isn't Pie chart already released? 🤔 
Maybe Gannt is next?
cc @alexfauquette

---

> title: MUI X improvements, Charts in Alpha, Discord, and more!

Reviewer 3: I believe Discord launch deserves its own launch, we could invite users to this blog post, but I wouldn't have it on the title.

```suggestion
title: MUI X improvements, Charts in Alpha, Discord, and more!
```

Reviewer 3: Also, I think we should retain the reference to v6.10.0 in the title.

Reviewer 4: I was about to leave the same comments, great

Author: removed for now. Will do it's own blog

description: Support for time zones, a new filtering UI, charts and Discord

> date: 2023-07-30T00:00:00.000Z

Reviewer 3: new launch date?

```suggestion
date: 2023-08-07T00:00:00.000Z
```

authors: ['richbustos', 'josefreitas']
card: true
tags: ['MUI X', 'News']
---

<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/intro.png" alt="" width="2400" height="600" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" />

Since the first v6 stable release, we have continuously rolled out new major features.
Now that we reached [MUI X v6.10.x](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases), it's time to delve into the most recent additions to MUI X v6, and why you should get the latest version now.

## Table of contents

- [Date Pickers](#date-pickers)
  - [Support for Time zones](#support-for-time-zones)
  - [Digital Clock](#digital-clock)
- [Data Grid](#data-grid)
  - [Copy and Paste](#copy-and-paste)[<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan)
  - [Filter on Column headers](#filter-on-column-headers)[<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan)

>   - [Performance Enhancements: Smoother Scrolling and Expanding Rows](#performance-enhancements-smoother-scrolling-and-expanding-rows)

Reviewer 4: I think we should revert the order, MIT before Pro before Premium.

Reviewer 4: What's the perspective on this one?

Reviewer 5: If the ultimate goal is to convert community users to paid users, then I'd lead with the Premium and Pro features.

Author: I made the changes to MIT, Pro, then Premium as requested. 

I am a fan of Gary V's book, "[Jab, Jab, Jab, Right Hook](https://www.amazon.com/Jab-Right-Hook-Story-Social/dp/006227306X)".

This is essentially a marketing tactic for "give the people what they want for free, then hit them with a sales pitch" lol

> - [Charts - Alpha version](#charts---alpha-version)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- [Charts - Alpha version](#charts-alpha-version)
```

> - [Discord](#Discord)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- [Discord](#discord)
```

- [What's next](#whats-next)

> ## Date pickers

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Date Pickers
```

### Support for time zones

No more hassle displaying dates on the time zones of your choice. 🌎

You can effortlessly display and select dates and times in different time zones, without worrying about the conversion logic and keeping the stored value consistent with your backend.

> <img src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/timezone.gif" alt="" width="2400" height="600" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" />

Reviewer 4: The gif looks pixelized, how about we use video instead? https://www.notion.so/mui-org/Tips-for-high-quality-media-5a1686758f4f4267989b67a1c2c270da?pvs=4#adeeea5189df47968e9c0aacebe87aec

Use adapters to control the original value and set the `timezone` prop to define in which timezone the Date, Time, or DateTime should be displayed.

```tsx
<TimePicker
  value={value} // Can be in any timezone of your choice
  onChange={setValue}
  timezone="Pacific/Honolulu"
  label={'Rendered in "Pacific/Honolulu"'}
/>
```

Please check the [full instructions](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/timezone/) for more information on using this feature in your application.

### Digital clock

This feature is an alternative to the analog clock on time pickers; the original proposal was mainly focused on mobile devices, whereas the new interface is designed for a desktop experience or better time precision.
This new addition makes our date pickers even more versatile and user-friendly and is available as the default variant for desktops on both [TimePicker](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/time-picker/) and [DateTimePicker](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/date-time-picker/).

> <img src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/timepicker.gif" alt="" width="2400" height="600" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" />

Reviewer 4: Issue with the scale, it's not 1:1.

Furthermore, the callbacks `clipboardPasteStart` and `clipboardPasteEnd` are fired during the clipboard paste operation, which can be useful for extra customizations around the event.

For more details on how to use clipboard copy and paste, check out the [feature's page](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/clipboard/).

### Filter on column headers [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan)

This feature allows users to quickly filter the data without needing any additional menu and can be activated using the `unstable_headerFilters` prop.

The new filter fields are displayed below the headers and are synchronized with the filter panel, but for those seeking more simplicity, disable the default filter panel using `disableColumnFilter` prop and set filters to use only the default operator.
You can also customize the header filter cell for a specific column using the `renderHeaderFilter` method of `GridColDef`

For more details on how to use and customize the filters, check out its [documentation page](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/filtering/header-filters/).

> ### **Performance Enhancements: Smoother Scrolling and Expanding Rows**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Performance Enhancements: Smoother Scrolling and Expanding Rows
```

The Data Grid received significant performance improvements in MUI X v6, particularly concerning the data grid's scrolling efficiency and the expansion of children's rows.

These performance upgrades are part of our ongoing commitment to provide end-users with a superior experience.

> We always strive to ensure that MUI X remains performant and efficient, particularly when dealing with large and complex data.

Reviewer 4: @romgrk do you have ideas on how we could sell these improvements to the developers? I think it would be awesome to have some benchmark of before vs. after to get them excited, similar to https://www.prisma.io/blog/prisma-5-f66prwkjx72s.

Reviewer 7: Scrolling: We did get interesting improvements in scrolling performance, but it's very tame. It was from 10-20% less CPU usage on each scroll event, which is nice but isn't really noticeable. Maybe for low-end devices it's more noticeable.

Filtering: I could benchmark master 4 months ago and now, though I'm not finished with the improvements. Let me know when you need this I'll get you the numbers.

Reviewer 6: By the way, listing way to improve perf could be a good blog article topic :)

Reviewer 7: Here is an approximate but representative benchmark for now vs before the filtering improvements:

| | Average (ms) | StdDev (ms) |
| --- | --: | --: |
| Current | `118.8` | `+- 4.8` |
| Previous | `811.8` | `+- 16.0` |

So we have improved by 85% for this benchmark. The benchmark is a one-column string filter on 100,000 rows of the commodity dataset.

Author: @romgrk wonder if it would be beneficial to add that 85% improvement table on the blog?

Reviewer 7: I don't have a strong opinion, but I would finish the filtering improvements before announcing them.

Author: gotcha. wont add for now then.

Reviewer 4: At a high level, I think the order of effectiveness of the content:

1. (current state) No number, no ways to back the claim. I wonder if the blog wouldn't be better without the h3, allowing readers to focus more of their time on the rest of the blog.
2. Link to the relevant PRs, this would be a start.
3. A number without clearly explaining the reproduction case: https://nextjs.org/blog/next-8#massive-build-time-memory-usage-reduction it feels strange to read though, I almost feel 2 is a stronger case.
4. A number with a clear reproduction case: https://nextjs.org/blog/next-7#compilation-speed, https://nextjs.org/blog/next-8#smaller-initial-html-size, great!

Is there a way we could link the relevant PRs in the blog post 🙌?

Author: There's a bunch of CTA in the blog already and don't want crown it with more CTA. Im leaning toward removing the h3.

Reviewer 4: Ok removed

## Charts - alpha version 🎁

We are delighted to announce the upcoming expansion of MUI X– a brand-new suite of components specifically designed for building and easily customizing appealing charts.

With MUI X Charts, you can choose from a wide range of chart types, including line charts, bar charts, pie charts, area charts, scatter plots, and more. Each chart type is thoughtfully crafted with attention to detail, ensuring that the visual representations are not only aesthetically pleasing but also highly effective in conveying complex data.

And it ships with a couple of rad palettes, specially crafted by our designers!

Checkout a video highlighting some of our Charts!

> <video width="400" height="400" preload="metadata" controls>

Reviewer 3: `autoplay loop`?
```suggestion
<video width="400" height="400" preload="metadata" autoplay muted loop playsinline>
```

  <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/charts_final_v1.mov" type="video/mp4">
</video>

As we progress toward the stable version, we're committed to enhancing the overall experience for developers and users, so your feedback is fundamental!

We will also steadily expand our portfolio with new chart types; the Pie Chart is next on our list for the first stable version.
However, if there's a specific chart visualization you'd like us to prioritize, we encourage you to upvote the respective issue on [GitHub](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22component%3A+charts%22+label%3A%22waiting+for+%F0%9F%91%8D%22). Your input can directly influence our development schedule, so don't hesitate to let us know what matters most to you!

[Get started with charts now!](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/)

> ## Discord

Reviewer 3: I think I'd also move the discord to after "What's next", perhaps under ## Feedback would help connect the topic with the blog post.

Reviewer 8: One thing that struck me is that having the Discord announced on a blog post centered around X makes me think it's an X-specific thing, which is not! Not sure whether this resonates but I wondered if we should either expand the post scope to cover MUI as a whole or keep it as is (could be not a big deal).

Author: @danilo-leal You're totally right. I think we should separate this as a standalone blog

> <img src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/discord.png" alt="" width="2400" height="600" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" />

Reviewer 4: 1. The link on the image is https://bit.ly/mui-discord-server which points to the old server

<img width="258" alt="Screenshot 2023-07-31 at 16 31 19" src="https://github.com/mui/material-ui/assets/3165635/c74d143b-9bc6-4ead-8d09-1119183a9ebe">

to remove or replace for https://mui.com/r/discord.

Reviewer 4: 2. The MUI logo on the image doesn't look like the production logo, to update:

<img width="217" alt="Screenshot 2023-07-31 at 16 35 59" src="https://github.com/mui/material-ui/assets/3165635/15e8c815-4f18-42b4-b25e-90be48bd6108">

vs.

<img width="124" alt="Screenshot 2023-07-31 at 16 33 19" src="https://github.com/mui/material-ui/assets/3165635/63f9b957-38a2-4e09-bccc-11a8cee9b52c">

https://www.figma.com/file/nNAatyLlRl3Tq4nGHgAmNh/Primitives?type=design&mode=design&t=6EIPm30cEcCC6g6b-0

Reviewer 4: 3. The dimension, it's pixelized on my screen

```suggestion
<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/discord.png" alt="" width="640" height="320" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" />
```

but likely better to have a higher resolution export.

Author: Ah yes, The images were taken from the old blog which had outdated images. Will update. Thanks for the catch!

---
title: MUI X improvements, Charts in Alpha, Filtering, and more!

> description: Support for time zones, a new filtering UI, charts and more..

Author: I changed to:
```
title: Exciting MUI X improvements: v6.11.0
description: Support for time zones, Charts in alpha, Data Grid filtering, and more.
```

The previous title exceeded our 70 character limit. Is the new title too bland?

> description: Support for time zones, a new filtering UI, charts and more..

Reviewer 5: This about it this way: if you saw this blog post pop up on your twitter feed as you were mindlessly scrolling, what would convince you to click? In the world of copywriting, there are some tried-and-true techniques:

- answer the question "what's in it for me (the reader)?" - you can also think of this as making your reader a promise in the title that you will fulfill in the content.
  - when I see "Exciting MUI X improvements," it's not clear what I'll get out of reading this. It sounds like maybe the creators just want to tell me how cool they are. 😜
- identify the audience more clearly.
  - the current title doesn't tell me who this is for. Do we want to reach indie hackers? Engineering managers at enterprise firms? These audiences have very different needs, and if we try to appeal to both at the same time, we're more likely to appeal to neither.

Of course this stuff is easy to think about theoretically but really difficult to apply, especially in this context! The best thing you can do is brainstorm 5, 10, or even 20 different variations - every angle and word combo you can think of - and then narrow it down from there.

> description: Support for time zones, a new filtering UI, charts and more..

Author: "How reading this blog post will give you 10x ROI on your project". lol jk. 

Thanks for the tip. Brainstorming now!

date: 2023-08-07T00:00:00.000Z
authors: ['richbustos', 'josefreitas']
card: true
tags: ['MUI X', 'News']
---

<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/intro.png" alt="" width="2400" height="600" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" />

Since the first v6 stable release, we have continuously rolled out new major features.

> Now that we reached [MUI X v6.11.x](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases), it's time to delve into the most recent additions to MUI X v6, and why you should get the latest version now.

Author: I'll start thinking about this more when writing. Thank you!

## Table of contents

- [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
- [Date Pickers](#date-pickers)
  - [Support for time zones](#support-for-time-zones)
  - [Digital clock](#digital-clock)
- [Data Grid](#data-grid)
  - [Copy and Paste](#copy-and-paste)
  - [Filter on column headers](#filter-on-column-headers)
  - [Performance Enhancements: Smoother Scrolling and Expanding Rows](#performance-enhancements-smoother-scrolling-and-expanding-rows)
- [Charts - alpha version 🎁](#charts---alpha-version-)
- [What's next](#whats-next)
- [Feedback](#feedback)

## Date Pickers

### Support for time zones

No more hassle displaying dates on the time zones of your choice. 🌎

You can effortlessly display and select dates and times in different time zones, without worrying about the conversion logic and keeping the stored value consistent with your backend.

<video preload="metadata" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" autoplay muted loop controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/timezone.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

> Use adapters to control the original value and set the `timezone` prop to define in which timezone the Date, Time, or DateTime should be displayed.

Reviewer 5: It's totally cool to put prepositions at the end of sentences—makes the writing feel more conversational and natural. The rule not to do so is outdated and overly formal. 😁

```suggestion
Use adapters to control the original value and set the `timezone` prop to define which time zone the Date, Time, or DateTime should be displayed in.
```

```tsx
<TimePicker
  value={value} // Can be in any timezone of your choice
  onChange={setValue}
  timezone="Pacific/Honolulu"
  label={'Rendered in "Pacific/Honolulu"'}
/>
```

> Please check the [full instructions](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/timezone/) for more information on using this feature in your application.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Check the [full instructions](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/timezone/) for more information on using this feature in your application.
```

### Digital clock

This feature is an alternative to the analog clock on time pickers; the original proposal was mainly focused on mobile devices, whereas the new interface is designed for a desktop experience or better time precision.
This new addition makes our date pickers even more versatile and user-friendly and is available as the default variant for desktops on both [TimePicker](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/time-picker/) and [DateTimePicker](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/date-time-picker/).

<video preload="metadata" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" autoplay muted loop controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/timepicker.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

> Check out all the possibilities in [documentation](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/digital-clock/), and let us know your thoughts!

Reviewer 5: Informative link text

```suggestion
Check out all the possibilities in the [Date Pickers—Digital clock documentation](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/digital-clock/), and let us know your thoughts!
```

## Data Grid

> ### Copy and Paste[<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Copy and paste[<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan)
```

> After setting the prop `experimentalFeatures={{ clipboardPaste: true }}` you can copy and paste data directly from and to your Data Grid.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
After setting the `experimentalFeatures={{ clipboardPaste: true }}` prop, you can copy and paste data directly to and from your Data Grid.
```

> This new feature is extremely versatile, and you can exchange data from other fields, other grids, and even directly from and to the spreadsheet tool of your choice.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This new feature is extremely versatile, and you can exchange data from other fields, other grids, and even directly to and from the spreadsheet tool of your choice.
```

<video preload="metadata" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/copy_paste.mov" type="video/mp4">
</video>

This feature is integrated with the editing API, so pasted data can be persisted using the `processRowUpdate` prop to update your data source through your usual editing validation process.

> Furthermore, the callbacks `clipboardPasteStart` and `clipboardPasteEnd` are fired during the clipboard paste operation, which can be useful for extra customizations around the event.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The callbacks `clipboardPasteStart` and `clipboardPasteEnd` are fired during the clipboard paste operation, which can be useful for extra customizations around the event.
```

> For more details on how to use clipboard copy and paste, check out the [feature's page](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/clipboard/).

Reviewer 5: Informative link text

```suggestion
For more details on how to use clipboard copy and paste, check out the [Data Grid—Clipboard documentation](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/clipboard/).
```

### Filter on column headers[<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan)

> This feature allows users to quickly filter the data without needing any additional menu and can be activated using the `unstable_headerFilters` prop.

Reviewer 5: Run-on sentence - the two clauses are unconnected. Rephrasing second sentence for active voice.

```suggestion
Filtering on column headers gives users the ability to quickly filter data without any additional menu.
Use the the `unstable_headerFilters` prop to activate this feature.
```

> The new filter fields are displayed below the headers and are synchronized with the filter panel, but for those seeking more simplicity, disable the default filter panel using `disableColumnFilter` prop and set filters to use only the default operator.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The new filter fields are displayed below the headers, and are synchronized with the filter panel.
If you prefer more simplicity, you can disable the default filter panel using the `disableColumnFilter` prop, and set filters to use only the default operator.
```

You can also customize the header filter cell for a specific column using the `renderHeaderFilter` method of `GridColDef`.

<video preload="metadata" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/header_filter.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

> For more details on how to use and customize the filters, check out its [documentation page](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/filtering/header-filters/).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For more details, check out its [Data Grid—Header filters documentation](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/filtering/header-filters/).
```

> ### Performance Enhancements: Smoother Scrolling and Expanding Rows

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Performance enhancements: smoother scrolling and expanding rows
```

> The Data Grid received significant performance improvements in MUI X v6, particularly concerning the data grid's scrolling efficiency and the expansion of children's rows.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Data Grid received significant performance improvements in MUI X v6, particularly concerning its scrolling efficiency and the expansion of child rows.
```

> These performance upgrades are part of our ongoing commitment to provide end-users with a superior experience.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
These performance upgrades are part of our ongoing commitment to provide end users with a superior experience.
```

We always strive to ensure that MUI X remains performant and efficient, particularly when dealing with large and complex data.

## Charts - alpha version 🎁

> We are delighted to announce the upcoming expansion of MUI X– a brand-new suite of components specifically designed for building and easily customizing appealing charts.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We are delighted to announce the upcoming expansion of MUI X: a brand-new suite of components for building and customizing charts.
```

> With MUI X Charts, you can choose from a wide range of chart types, including line charts, bar charts, pie charts, area charts, scatter plots, and more. Each chart type is thoughtfully crafted with attention to detail, ensuring that the visual representations are not only aesthetically pleasing but also highly effective in conveying complex data.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
With MUI X Charts, you can choose from a wide range of chart types, including line charts, bar charts, pie charts, area charts, scatter plots, and more. 
Each chart type is thoughtfully crafted with attention to detail, ensuring that the visual representations are not only aesthetically pleasing, but also highly effective in conveying complex data.
```

> And it ships with a couple of rad palettes, specially crafted by our designers!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
And it ships with gorgeous palettes that were specially crafted by our designers!
```

> Checkout a video highlighting some of our Charts!

Reviewer 5: Checkout => Check out

```suggestion
Check out the video below, highlighting some of our Charts:
```

<video preload="metadata" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/charts_final_v1.mov" type="video/mp4">
</video>

As we progress toward the stable version, we're committed to enhancing the overall experience for developers and users, so your feedback is fundamental!

> We will also steadily expand our portfolio with new chart types such as [Heat Map](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/heat-map/),[Funnel](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/funnel/), [Gantt](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/gantt/),and much more!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We will also steadily expand our portfolio with new chart types such as [Heat Map](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/heat-map/),[Funnel](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/funnel/), [Gantt](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/gantt/), and more.
```

> However, if there's a specific chart visualization you'd like us to prioritize, we encourage you to upvote the respective issue on [GitHub](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22component%3A+charts%22+label%3A%22waiting+for+%F0%9F%91%8D%22). Your input can directly influence our development schedule, so don't hesitate to let us know what matters most to you!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If there's a specific chart visualization you'd like us to prioritize, we encourage you to upvote the respective [issue on GitHub](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22component%3A+charts%22+label%3A%22waiting+for+%F0%9F%91%8D%22). 
Your input can directly influence our development schedule, so don't hesitate to let us know what matters most to you!
```

[Get started with charts now!](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/)

## What's next

> We'll soon announce what's coming for v7, for now one of our major milestones is moving the [TreeView component](https://mui.com/material-ui/react-tree-view/) from the lab to a stable release.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We'll follow up soon to announce what's coming for v7, but for now one of our major goals is to move the [Tree View component](https://mui.com/material-ui/react-tree-view/) from the lab to a stable release.
```

You can find additional information about other future developments in our [public roadmap](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/projects/1).

## Feedback

> We are always happy to get feedback, so if you'd like to share your pain points and use cases, please [leave your contact](https://forms.gle/vsBv6CLPz9h57xg8A) info.

Reviewer 5: Informative link text

```suggestion
We are always happy to get feedback, so if you'd like to share your pain points and use cases, please leave your contact info with us through [this Google Form](https://forms.gle/vsBv6CLPz9h57xg8A).
```

---

> title: Exciting MUI X improvements: v6.11.0

Author: it's very hard, lol. Ive been stuck on it for the last few days lol.

> description: Support for time zones, Charts in alpha, Data Grid filtering, and more.

Reviewer: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/timezone#:~:text=zone%20(chiefly%20US)-,Usage%20notes,likely%20to%20use%20time%20zone.

> In the US, [timezone](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/timezone#English) seems to be favored considerably (unless comparing different specific zones), while the UK seems more likely to use [time zone](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/time_zone#English).

In the doc I use `timezones`
Do you have a strong preference for `time zones` ?
If so, we should probably unify everywhere

Author: I prefer `timezones`.

cc: @samuelsycamore to get his thoughts on this as well.

> date: 2023-08-07T00:00:00.000Z

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
date: 2023-08-14T00:00:00.000Z
```

authors: ['richbustos', 'josefreitas']
card: true
tags: ['MUI X', 'News']
---

<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/intro.png" alt="" width="2400" height="600" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" />

Since the first v6 stable release, we've continuously rolled out new major features.

> Now that we've reached [MUI X v6.11.x](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases), it's time to delve into the most recent additions to MUI X v6, and why you should get the latest version now.

Reviewer 4: No?

```suggestion
Now that we've reached [MUI X v6.11.0](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases), it's time to delve into the most recent additions to MUI X v6, and why you should get the latest version now.
```

Author: set "x" just in case we are passed this version when launch. I will set to 0

Reviewer 4: But what about the versions released after we publish the post?

Author: That's why I left an ambiguous "x" so we don't specify the number for that reason. So do you think we should revert back to "x"? 

I dont have a strong opinion but if I had to choose one, it would to revert back to "x" in the version number.

## Table of contents

- [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
- [Date Pickers](#date-pickers)
  - [Support for time zones](#support-for-time-zones)
  - [Digital clock](#digital-clock)
- [Data Grid](#data-grid)

>   - [Copy and paste](#copy-and-paste)

Reviewer 4: We are missing the plan no?

```suggestion
  - [Copy and paste](#copy-and-paste) [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan)
```

Author: I removed it and put it on the headers and not on the table of content.

Will add it back on

>   - [Filter on column headers](#filter-on-column-headers)

Reviewer 4: We are missing the plan no?

```suggestion
  - [Copy and paste](#copy-and-paste) [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan)
```

Author: same as above

  - [Performance enhancements: smoother scrolling and expanding rows](#performance-enhancements-smoother-scrolling-and-expanding-rows)
- [Charts - alpha version 🎁](#charts-alpha-version)
- [What's next](#whats-next)
- [Feedback](#feedback)

## Date Pickers

### Support for time zones

No more hassle displaying dates in the time zones of your choice. 🌎

You can effortlessly display and select dates and times in different time zones, without worrying about conversion logic or maintaining consistency with your backend.

> <video preload="metadata" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" autoplay muted loop controls>

Reviewer 4: Do we need the video controls on this loop video? If we follow https://www.notion.so/mui-org/Tips-for-high-quality-media-5a1686758f4f4267989b67a1c2c270da?pvs=4#5f9e23d043a741dcbc1304ac9e9c1ba3 we should do:

```suggestion
<video preload="metadata" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" autoplay muted loop>
```

and in the one below.

Author: I like adding the control attribute just in case the reader finds the loop annoying when reading through the blog. Imagine reading through a blog and theres a colorful video playing nonstop. IMO, I would find it distracting. 

Will commit your suggestion for now and pose the question in notion. We can discuss there

  <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/timezone.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

Set the `timezone` prop to define which time zone the Date, Time, or DateTime should be displayed in.

```tsx
<TimePicker
  value={value}
  onChange={setValue}
  timezone="Pacific/Honolulu" // Can be in any timezone of your choice
  label={'Rendered in "Pacific/Honolulu"'}
/>
```

Check the [full instructions](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/timezone/) for more information on using this feature in your application.

> ### Digital clock

Reviewer 4: It could be interesting to show the analog clock and explain why it's not great for desktop but only for mobile, it would give more weight to why this is an exciting new feature.

> The original proposal was mainly focused on mobile devices, whereas the new interface is designed for a desktop experience for better time precision.

Reviewer 4: "proposal" makes no sense to me.

Maybe?

```suggestion
The analog clock was created to optimize the user experience on touch screens, primarily for mobiles.
This new digital clock interface is designed for desktops, it also allows better time selection precision.
```

The digital clock is an alternative to the Time Pickers' analog clock.
The original proposal was mainly focused on mobile devices, whereas the new interface is designed for a desktop experience for better time precision.
This new addition makes our Date Pickers even more versatile and user-friendly than before.
It's available as the default variant for desktops on both the [Time Picker](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/time-picker/) and the [Date Time Picker](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/date-time-picker/).

<video preload="metadata" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" autoplay muted loop controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/timepicker.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

Check out all the possibilities in the [Date Pickers—Digital clock documentation](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/digital-clock/), and let us know your thoughts!

## Data Grid

> ### Copy and paste[<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan)

Author: MarkdownLint won't allow me to create white space. This should be true for all blogs before, right? 

![image](https://github.com/mui/material-ui/assets/92274722/eaa79f94-d3cc-48ef-ad62-e6896d64b114)

> ### Copy and paste[<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan)

Reviewer 4: Please try again

> ### Copy and paste[<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan)

Author: Ill override MarkdownLinter.

After setting the `experimentalFeatures={{ clipboardPaste: true }}` prop, you can copy and paste data directly to and from your Data Grid.

This new feature is extremely versatile, and you can exchange data from other fields, other grids, and even directly to and from the spreadsheet tool of your choice.

<video preload="metadata" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/copy_paste.mov" type="video/mp4">

> </video>

Author: Is this a blocker? I think the videos make a great glimpse of what developers can do. I think the ultimate goal is for users to read the blog and get them to the docs.

> </video>

Reviewer 4: This is relative to my screen and experience. I think the problem is that only 1 truly makes me want to go to the docs and continue reading the blog post. 2 and 3 are not differentiating to the positive, but nor negative, feels neutral. 4 feels like they undermine the quality of the actual components.

Is this a blocker? I think it's for you to judge, it's your area of ownership and accountability.

> </video>

Author: Updated digital clock video. Fixed pixel ratio, input taking too much width, and show the full popup.

> </video>

Reviewer 4: Thanks

This feature is integrated with the editing API, so pasted data can be persisted using the `processRowUpdate` prop to update your data source through your usual editing validation process.
The callbacks `clipboardPasteStart` and `clipboardPasteEnd` are fired during the clipboard paste operation, which can be useful for extra customizations around the event.

For more details on how to use clipboard copy and paste, check out the [Data Grid—Clipboard documentation](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/clipboard/).

> ### Filter on column headers[<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan)

Author: MarkdownLint won't allow me to create white space 

![image](https://github.com/mui/material-ui/assets/92274722/eaa79f94-d3cc-48ef-ad62-e6896d64b114)

### Performance enhancements: smoother scrolling and expanding rows

The Data Grid received significant performance improvements in MUI X v6, particularly concerning its scrolling efficiency and the expansion of child rows.

These performance upgrades are part of our ongoing commitment to provide end users with a superior experience.
We always strive to ensure that MUI X remains performant and efficient, particularly when dealing with large and complex data.

## Charts - alpha version 🎁

We are delighted to announce the upcoming expansion of MUI X: a brand-new suite of components for building and customizing charts.

With MUI X Charts, you can choose from a wide range of chart types, including line charts, bar charts, pie charts, area charts, scatter plots, and more. 
Each chart type is thoughtfully crafted with attention to detail, ensuring that the visual representations are not only aesthetically pleasing, but also highly effective in conveying complex data.

And it ships with gorgeous palettes that were specially crafted by our designers!

Check out the video below, highlighting some of our Charts:

> <video preload="metadata" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>

Reviewer 4: Too close to the text no? 
```suggestion
<video preload="metadata" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>
```

  <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/charts_final_v1.mov" type="video/mp4">
</video>

As we progress toward the stable version, we're committed to enhancing the overall experience for developers and users, so your feedback is fundamental!

> We will also steadily expand our portfolio with new chart types such as [Heat Map](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/heat-map/),[Funnel](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/funnel/), [Gantt](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/gantt/), and more.

Reviewer 4: It looks like we went with lower case on the page and GitHub issue, also missing space.

```suggestion
We will also steadily expand our portfolio with new chart types such as [Heat map](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/heat-map/), [Funnel](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/funnel/), [Gantt](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/gantt/), and more.
```

Author: yeah, I'm getting confused because I thought all component names should be capitalized. Like Date Pickers, Data Grid, etc. Wouldnt this be in the same bucket? Or no since it's a type under Charts? We should definitely standardize.

Author: will commit your suggestion

If there's a specific chart visualization you'd like us to prioritize, we encourage you to upvote the respective [issue on GitHub](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22component%3A+charts%22+label%3A%22waiting+for+%F0%9F%91%8D%22). 
Your input can directly influence our development schedule, so don't hesitate to let us know what matters most to you!

[Get started with charts now!](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/)

## What's next

We'll follow up soon to announce what's coming for v7, but for now one of our major goals is to move the [Tree View component](https://mui.com/material-ui/react-tree-view/) from the lab to a stable release.
You can find additional information about other future developments in our [public roadmap](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/projects/1).

## Feedback

We are always happy to get feedback, so if you'd like to share your pain points and use cases, please leave your contact info with us through [this Google Form](https://forms.gle/vsBv6CLPz9h57xg8A).

> As usual, you're welcome to join the discussion by requesting or commenting on new features, or reporting bugs in our [GitHub repository](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/new/choose).

Author: Thanks for the feedback! Going to change it a bit

Check out the video below, highlighting some of our Charts:

<video preload="metadata" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline>
  <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-mid-v6-features/charts_final_v1.mov" type="video/mp4">
</video>

As we progress toward the stable version, we're committed to enhancing the overall experience for developers and users, so your feedback is fundamental!

We will also steadily expand our portfolio with new chart types such as [Heat map](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/heat-map/), [Funnel](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/funnel/), [Gantt](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/gantt/), and more.
If there's a specific chart visualization you'd like us to prioritize, we encourage you to upvote the respective [issue on GitHub](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22component%3A+charts%22+label%3A%22waiting+for+%F0%9F%91%8D%22).
Your input can directly influence our development schedule, so don't hesitate to let us know what matters most to you!

[Get started with charts now!](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/)

## Tree View is now part of the MUI X family

> [Tree View](https://mui.com/x/react-tree-view/) will be migrating from the [lab](https://mui.com/material-ui/about-the-lab/) to Alpha and is now part of MUI X!

Reviewer 3: for the next PR, another thing to consider is to make it clearer that it can be already downloaded and tested (as we expect more feedback and feature requests).

Something along the lines.
Tree View has migrated from the lab to Alpha and is now part of MUI X! You can now download the pre-release package for testing.

Another suggestion is to ensure users that MIT features remain MIT.
But perhaps we can simply later link to the dedicated blog post.

Reviewer 4: Ah right, I was confused about this. I jump too quickly to a conclusion by changing the version to v5.11.1. Fixed in: 9bec39b0e833890f595d4f9136c801a90ca3e234. 

I think the problem was:

> [Tree View](https://mui.com/x/react-tree-view/) will be migrating from the [lab](https://mui.com/material-ui/about-the-lab/) to Alpha and is now part of MUI X!

A component can't be part of MUI X and not be migrated at the same time.
